Create an rqt_bag plugin (#6212)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/Advanced/Create-An-Rqtbag-Plugin.rst

Create an rqt_bag Plugin
========================

Let's say you have bags of data and you want to be able to visualize them.
``rqt_bag`` gives you the ability to scroll through the recorded messages and visualize the raw message values.
However, often may want something more visual, or to do some post-processing on the raw message.

> For that, you can write an rqt_bag plugin, using the proof-of-concept Python plugin system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For that, you can write an rqt_bag plugin, using the Python plugin system.
```

I am not sure we want to throw those words at the user in a tutorial might be a bit confusing.

That way you can go from a simple visualization of the messages...

.. image:: images/rqtbag_plugin_base.png
   :alt: screenshot of standard rqt_bag view

to something like this:

.. image:: images/rqtbag_plugin_full.png
   :alt: screenshot of rqt_bag with colored timeline and extra panel on the side

Some Test Data
--------------

> `SomeDiagnostics <https://github.com/MetroRobots/rqt_bag_diagnostics_demo/raw/refs/heads/main/SomeDiagnostics.zip>`__ is a bag file you can use for this tutorial, once you unzip it.

Reviewer: I don't know how I feel about pointing to a third party for data. 

On one hand, we love you and you are great, but on the other hand you could also be a malicious actor that is asking someone to download a naughty zip file. Maybe we want to drop the data somewhere more official? I don't have any strong feelings here, but we probably should discuss. This may become a bigger issue as the PAI-WG gets rolling.

Author: I initially tried to include the ZIP in this repo, but the file did not automatically get included with the `build` files. I will happily include it in this repo if someone provides instructions.

Reviewer 2: What about including a short script generating the bag file? It should be ~15 lines of code if we're good with random data.

Author: There is now a short script. 39 lines - feel free to Code Golf it if you want.

Reviewer 2: I hade on mind something that would directly generate the bag:

```python
import os
import random
import sys
from diagnostic_msgs.msg import DiagnosticStatus
from rosbag2_py import ConverterOptions, StorageOptions, SequentialReader, SequentialWriter, TopicMetadata
from rclpy.duration import Duration
from rclpy.serialization import serialize_message
from rclpy.time import Time

MODES = ['OK', 'WARN', 'ERROR']

class DiagnosticGenerator:
    def __init__(self):
        self.last_status = None
        self.last_time = Time()

    def generate_msg(self) -> tuple[DiagnosticStatus, Time] | None:
        self.last_time += Duration(seconds=0.5 + random.random())

        if self.last_status is None:
            # Random initial status
            status = random.randint(0, len(MODES))
        elif random.random() > 0.8:
            # Do not publish a msg every cycle
            return None
        else:
            # Random new (different) status
            delta = random.randint(1, 2)
            status = (self.last_status + delta) % len(MODES)

        self.last_status = status
        return DiagnosticStatus(level=bytes(status)), self.last_time

if __name__ == '__main__':
    topic = '/single_diagnostic'
    bag_end_time = Time(seconds=55)

    random.seed(1)

    default_dir = os.environ.get('XDG_DOWNLOAD_DIR', os.environ.get('TMPDIR', '/tmp'))
    default_path = os.path.join(default_dir, 'SomeDiagnostics')
    output_path = sys.argv[1] if len(sys.argv) > 1 else default_path

    gen = DiagnosticGenerator()

    writer = SequentialWriter()
    writer.open(StorageOptions(output_path, 'mcap'), ConverterOptions('cdr', 'cdr'))
    writer.create_topic(
        TopicMetadata(0, topic, 'diagnostic_msgs/msg/DiagnosticStatus', 'cdr'))

    stamp = Time()
    while stamp < bag_end_time:
        msg = gen.generate_msg()
        if msg is None:
            continue
        msg, stamp = msg
        writer.write(topic, serialize_message(msg), stamp.nanoseconds)

    writer.close()
    print(f'Finished writing bag file to {output_path}')
    
    # Print bag statistics
    reader = SequentialReader()
    reader.open_uri(output_path)
    print(reader.get_metadata())
    reader.close()
```

Reviewer: Sure, I think we've turned a simple download location problem into a potential Python dependency problem without solving the root question, but whatever.

Reviewer 2: rqt_bag depends on rosbag2_py and rclpy ;)

Package Setup
-------------

We're going to create a package called ``rqt_bag_diagnostics_demo``.
Start with a basic ``ament_python`` package, and insert the following into your ``package.xml``.

.. code:: xml

       <depend>diagnostic_msgs</depend>
       <depend>rqt_bag</depend>
       <export>
         <build_type>ament_python</build_type>
         <rqt_bag plugin="${prefix}/plugins.xml"/>
       </export>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

What we're doing here is making our package depend on the RQT Bag and Diagnostic Messages packages and then exporting an XML file that defines our RQT plugins.
```

In ``setup.py``, insert the following line:

.. code:: python

       package_dir={'': 'src'},

and add

.. code:: python

           ('share/' + package_name, ['plugins.xml']),

to the ``data_files``.

Finally, we're going to define the plugin in an xml file called ``plugins.xml`` (as referenced in the ``package.xml``)

.. code:: xml

   <library path="src">
     <class name="DiagnosticBagPlugin"
            type="rqt_bag_diagnostics_demo.the_plugin.DiagnosticBagPlugin"
            base_class_type="rqt_bag::Plugin">
       <description>
       </description>
     </class>
   </library>

> The name is the name of the class we'll create.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `DiagnosticBagPlugin` is the name of the class we'll create.
```

Create an rqt_bag Plugin
========================

> Let's say you have bags of data and you want to be able to visualize them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's say you have bag files and you want to be able to create a custom visualization of some data.
```

``rqt_bag`` gives you the ability to scroll through the recorded messages and visualize the raw message values.

> However, often may want something more visual, or to do some post-processing on the raw message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, you may sometimes want a more visual presentation, or you need to do some post-processing on the raw messages.
```

For that, you can write an rqt_bag plugin, using the Python plugin system.
That way you can go from a simple visualization of the messages...

.. image:: images/rqtbag_plugin_base.png
   :alt: screenshot of standard rqt_bag view

to something like this:

.. image:: images/rqtbag_plugin_full.png
   :alt: screenshot of rqt_bag with colored timeline and extra panel on the side

Some Test Data
--------------

`SomeDiagnostics <https://github.com/MetroRobots/rqt_bag_diagnostics_demo/raw/refs/heads/main/SomeDiagnostics.zip>`__ is a bag file you can use for this tutorial, once you unzip it.

Package Setup
-------------

We're going to create a package called ``rqt_bag_diagnostics_demo``.

> Start with a basic ``ament_python`` package, and insert the following into your ``package.xml``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start by creating a basic ``ament_python`` package, e.g. by calling:

.. code:: console

       $ ros2 pkg create --build-type ament_python --dependencies diagnostic_msgs python_qt_binding rqt_bag \
         --description "rqt_bag plugin for diagnostics_msgs" --license Apache-2.0 \
         --maintainer-name "My Name" --maintainer-email "my@name.robots" \
         rqt_bag_diagnostics_demo

Edit the relevant parts of the generated ``package.xml`` to look like this:
```

.. code:: xml

       <depend>diagnostic_msgs</depend>

>        <depend>rqt_bag</depend>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       <exec_depend>diagnostic_msgs</exec_depend>
       <exec_depend>python_qt_binding</exec_depend>
       <exec_depend>rqt_bag</exec_depend>
```

I think python_qt_binding should also be included because it is used in the following code.

       <export>
         <build_type>ament_python</build_type>
         <rqt_bag plugin="${prefix}/plugins.xml"/>
       </export>

> What we're doing here is making our package depend on the RQT Bag and Diagnostic Messages packages and then exporting an XML file that defines our RQT plugins.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What we're doing here is making our package depend on the rqt_bag, python_qt_binding and diagnostic_msgs packages and then exporting an XML file that defines our rqt_bag plugins.
```

In ``setup.py``, insert the following line:

.. code:: python

       package_dir={'': 'src'},

and add

.. code:: python

           ('share/' + package_name, ['plugins.xml']),

> to the ``data_files``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In ``setup.py``, add the following line

.. code:: python

           ('share/' + package_name, ['plugins.xml']),

to the ``data_files``.
```

> Finally, we're going to define the plugin in an xml file called ``plugins.xml`` (as referenced in the ``package.xml``)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, we're going to define the plugin in an XML file called ``plugins.xml`` (as referenced in ``package.xml``).
This file describes all plugins provided by this package (there can be multiple plugins per package).
```

.. code:: xml

>    <library path="src">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   <library path=".">
```

     <class name="DiagnosticBagPlugin"
            type="rqt_bag_diagnostics_demo.the_plugin.DiagnosticBagPlugin"
            base_class_type="rqt_bag::Plugin">
       <description>

>        </description>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       <description>Awesome Diagnostic</description>
```

     </class>
   </library>

> The ``name`` attribute is the name of the class we'll create.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``name`` attribute is the name of the plugin we create. It has to be unique among all plugins, but you will not use it in any other way.
```

Author: Unique among all rqt_bag plugins?

Reviewer 2: I think so. But maybe nothing looks at the name? Anyways, guiding people to use unique names wouldn't hurt, would it?

Reviewer 2: I think so. But maybe nothing looks at the name? Anyways, guiding people to use unique names wouldn't hurt, would it?

Reviewer 2: I think so. But maybe nothing looks at the name? Anyways, guiding people to use unique names wouldn't hurt, would it?

> The type is the way we would import the class in Python, i.e. ``package_name.name_of_file.class_name``

Author: ```suggestion
The ``name`` attribute is the name of the class we'll create.
The ``type`` attribute is the way we would import the class in Python, i.e. ``package_name.name_of_file.class_name``
```

> The ``type`` attribute is the way we would import the class in Python, i.e. ``package_name.name_of_file.class_name``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``type`` attribute is the way we would import the plugin's class in Python, i.e. ``package_name.module_name.class_name``
```

Defining the Plugin
-------------------

In this particular Python library, we need to define the package within the ``src`` folder, so the ``__init__.py`` should be located at ``src/package_name/__init__.py`` relative to the package root.

> As referenced in the ``plugins.xml``, all the code that follows will be in ``src/rqt_bag_diagnostics_demo/the_plugin.py``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we need to actually implement the ``the_plugin.py`` Python module (as referenced in ``plugins.xml``).
First, make sure there is an empty file ``__init__.py`` in ``rqt_bag_diagnostics_demo`` subfolder, turning it into a Python package.

.. note::

   Please note that according to the current Python standards in ROS, the folder with ROS package (``rqt_bag_diagnostics_demo``) contains a subfolder with the same name.
   Therefore, the full path will be ``WORKSPACE/src/rqt_bag_diagnostics_demo/rqt_bag_diagnostics_demo/__init__.py``.

Now create ``the_plugin.py`` next to ``__init__.py``.
This file will contain all code of the plugin.
```

First, the core Plugin class.

.. code:: python

   from rqt_bag.plugins.plugin import Plugin
   from python_qt_binding.QtCore import Qt
   from diagnostic_msgs.msg import DiagnosticStatus

   def get_color(diagnostic):
       if diagnostic.level == DiagnosticStatus.OK:
           return Qt.green
       elif diagnostic.level == DiagnosticStatus.WARN:
           return Qt.yellow
       else:  # ERROR or STALE
           return Qt.red

   class DiagnosticBagPlugin(Plugin):
       def __init__(self):
           pass

       def get_view_class(self):

>            return None

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
           # This method is required; we will implement it later
           return None
```

       def get_renderer_class(self):
           return None

       def get_message_types(self):
           return ['diagnostic_msgs/msg/DiagnosticStatus']

Here we have some basic imports, and helper function that we'll use later, and a class that defines the three parts of an ``rqt_bag`` plugin.

  1. ``view_class`` - a.k.a. ``TopicMessageView`` - A separate panel that can be used for viewing individual messages.
  2. ``renderer_class`` - a.k.a. ``TimelineView`` - A tool for drawing onto the timeline view of the bag data.
  3. ``message_types`` - An array of strings that define what message types this plugin can be used for.
     You can return ``['*']`` for it to apply to all messages.

Since we return None for the first two methods, this plugin won't do anything.
We'll tackle each of these separately.

TopicMessageView
----------------

Version 1
~~~~~~~~~

> We're going to create a class that extends the ``TopicMessageView`` class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We're going to create a class that extends the ``TopicMessageView`` class (still in ``the_plugin.py``).
```

First, add the import:

.. code:: python

   from rqt_bag import TopicMessageView

Then define this new class:

.. code:: python

   class DiagnosticPanel(TopicMessageView):
       name = 'Awesome Diagnostic'

       def message_viewed(self, bag, entry, ros_message, msg_type_name, topic):
           super(DiagnosticPanel, self).message_viewed(bag=bag, entry=entry, ros_message=ros_message, msg_type_name=msg_type_name, topic=topic)
           print(f'{topic}: {ros_message}')

Here we define two things.

> The name string defines what we'll see in the menu of ``rqt_bag``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``name`` class variable defines what rqt_bag shows when right-clicking a ``DiagnosticStatus`` topic in the timeline.
```

The ``message_viewed`` method defines what to do when the message is selected.
So here, we'll just print the message to terminal for now.

We need to hook this class we've created into the plugin infrastructure, and for that, we return the class object itself in the ``get_view_class`` method.

.. code:: python

       def get_view_class(self):
           return DiagnosticPanel

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

.. note::

   Do not type in ``return DiagnosticPanel()`` (with the ``()``).
   Just ``return DiagnosticPanel`` is correct.

```

To see this in action, open up the provided bag file, and right click on the diagnostic track.
It will give you two options under the "View": Raw, and our "Awesome Diagnostic."

> Clicking this should open a panel and you can scroll through the messages and watch them print.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clicking this should open a panel and you can scroll through the messages and watch them print.

.. code:: console

       $ ros2 run rqt_bag rqt_bag ~/Downloads/SomeDiagnostics
```

Author: I added the command line to the top of the tutorial instead.

.. image:: images/rqtbag_plugin_panel.png
   :alt: screenshot of rqt_bag with blank extra panel

Version 2
~~~~~~~~~

``TopicMessageView`` is itself an extension of a ``QObject``.
There's lots of things you could do with this using all the might and power of Qt.

> This is not a python Qt tutorial sadly.

Reviewer 2: But it could contain a link to Qt docs.

So we're going to just add a simple QWidget and draw on it.
First, add the following imports:

.. code:: python

   from python_qt_binding.QtWidgets import QWidget
   from python_qt_binding.QtGui import QBrush, QPainter

Then update the ``DiagnosticPanel`` class to the following:

.. code:: python

   class DiagnosticPanel(TopicMessageView):
       name = 'Awesome Diagnostic'

       def __init__(self, timeline, parent, topic):
           super(DiagnosticPanel, self).__init__(timeline, parent, topic)
           self.widget = QWidget()
           parent.layout().addWidget(self.widget)
           self.msg = None
           self.widget.paintEvent = self.paintEvent

       def message_viewed(self, bag, msg_details):
           super(DiagnosticPanel, self).message_viewed(bag, msg_details)
           _, self.msg, _ = msg_details

>            self.widget.update()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       def message_viewed(self, bag, entry, ros_message, msg_type_name, topic):
           super(DiagnosticPanel, self).message_viewed(bag=bag, entry=entry, ros_message=ros_message, msg_type_name=msg_type_name, topic=topic)
           self.msg = ros_message
           self.widget.update()
```

The previous implementation seemed to be completely broken (probably still ROS 1 implementation?)

       def paintEvent(self, event):
           self.qp = QPainter()
           self.qp.begin(self.widget)

           rect = event.rect()

           if self.msg is None:
               self.qp.fillRect(0, 0, rect.width(), rect.height(), Qt.white)
           else:
               color = get_color(self.msg)
               self.qp.setBrush(QBrush(color))

>                self.qp.drawEllipse(0, 0, rect.width(), rect.height())

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
           qp = QPainter()
           qp.begin(self.widget)

           rect = event.rect()

           if self.msg is None:
               qp.fillRect(0, 0, rect.width(), rect.height(), Qt.white)
           else:
               color = get_color(self.msg)
               qp.setBrush(QBrush(color))
               qp.drawEllipse(0, 0, rect.width(), rect.height())
```

When the painter is stored, I get this warning:

> QBackingStore::endPaint() called with active painter; did you forget to destroy it or call QPainter::end() on it?

In the constructor, we create a ``QWidget`` and override its ``paintEvent`` method.

> Now when we get a message with ``message_viewed``, we save it, and update the widget, which will in turn call our ``paintEvent``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now when we get a message with ``message_viewed``, we save it, and update the widget, which will in turn call our ``paintEvent``.
Do not call ``paintEvent`` manually, that has to be done by Qt.
```

Before a message is selected, we'll just paint a white rectangle.
Otherwise, we'll draw a circle, using our handy helper method to relate the color to what level the diagnostic is at.

.. image:: images/rqtbag_plugin_circle.png
   :alt: screenshot of rqt_bag with a circle drawn on the extra panel

TimelineRenderer
----------------

.. _version-1-1:

Version 1
~~~~~~~~~

> To draw on the timeline, we extend the ``TimelineRenderer`` class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To draw on the timeline, we extend the ``TimelineRenderer`` class (still in ``the_plugin.py``).
```

Add an import:

.. code:: python

   from rqt_bag import TimelineRenderer

Then add the new class.

.. code:: python

   class DiagnosticTimeline(TimelineRenderer):
       def __init__(self, timeline, height=80):
           TimelineRenderer.__init__(self, timeline, msg_combine_px=height)

>        def draw_timeline_segment(self, painter, topic, start, end, x, y, width, height):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       def draw_timeline_segment(self, painter: QPainter, topic, start: float, end: float, x: float, y: int, width: float, height: int):
```

           painter.setBrush(QBrush(Qt.blue))

>            painter.drawRect(x, y, width, height)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
           painter.drawRect(int(x), y, int(width), height)
```

Apparently, the arguments are now floats, but Qt requires ints. I don't care about rounding in this case.

You can customize how tall the message's portion of the timeline is with the ``msg_combine_px`` parameter.

> The key method to override is the ``draw_timeline_segment`` method which gives you potions of the timeline to draw.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The key method to override is ``draw_timeline_segment()`` which gives you portions of the timeline to draw.
```

For now we'll just draw blue rectangles on each segment.

Just like the message view, you also have to edit the plugin to return your class.

.. code:: python

       def get_renderer_class(self):
           return DiagnosticTimeline

To view this, you have to enable "Thumbnails" (a misleading name) in the rqt_bag gui.

.. image:: images/rqtbag_plugin_blue.png
   :alt: screenshot of rqt_bag with blue bars drawn on the timeline

.. _version-2-1:

Version 2
~~~~~~~~~

Okay, now we actually want to customize how the messages are drawn in the timeline based on the messages themselves.

> For that, there's a wonky bunch of magical incantations you need to read the messages out of the bag files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For that, you will need to read actual messages from the loaded bag files.
```

Here are the new imports:

.. code:: python

   from python_qt_binding.QtGui import QPen
   from rclpy.time import Time

>    import math

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>    from rclpy.serialization import deserialize_message

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   from rclpy.serialization import deserialize_message
   from rqt_bag.bag_helper import to_sec
```

> Then update ``draw_timeline_segment``:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then update ``draw_timeline_segment()``:
```

.. code:: python

>        def draw_timeline_segment(self, painter, topic, start, end, x, y, width, height):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       def draw_timeline_segment(self, painter: QPainter, topic, start: float, end: float, x: float, y: int, width: float, height: int):
```

           def _convert_stamp(float_t):
               nano, sec = math.modf(float_t)
               return Time(seconds=int(sec), nanoseconds=int(nano * 1e9))

           bag_timeline = self.timeline.scene()
           start_t = _convert_stamp(start)

>            end_t = _convert_stamp(end)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
           bag_timeline = self.timeline.scene()
           start_t = Time(seconds=start)
           end_t = Time(seconds=end)
```

           for bag, entry in bag_timeline.get_entries_with_bags([topic], start_t, end_t):
               topic, raw_data, t = bag_timeline.read_message(bag, entry.timestamp, topic)
               msg = deserialize_message(raw_data, DiagnosticStatus)
               color = get_color(msg)
               painter.setBrush(QBrush(color))
               painter.setPen(QPen(color, 5))

>                p_x = self.timeline.map_stamp_to_x(t / 1e9)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
               t_float = to_sec(Time(nanoseconds=t))
               p_x = int(self.timeline.map_stamp_to_x(t_float))
```

               painter.drawLine(p_x, y, p_x, y + height - 1)

> Using the topic, start and end parameters of the method, we can get the bag entries that correspond with this segment of the timeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the ``topic``, ``start`` and ``end`` parameters of the method, we can get the bag entries that correspond with this segment of the timeline.
```

We can then get the actual message and use it to draw.
Here we are drawing a line based on the level of the diagnostic message.

> We can automatically figure out where to draw the message horizontally using the ``map_stamp_to_x`` method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can automatically figure out where to draw the message horizontally using ``map_stamp_to_x()`` method which converts float seconds to widget pixels.
```

.. image:: images/rqtbag_plugin_timeline.png
   :alt: screenshot of rqt_bag with differently colored bars on the timeline

> The alternative to this weird way of accessing the messages is to use the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If computing the message representation on timeline is more computationally demanding, you should use
```

    import rclpy
    from rclpy.node import Node

    MODES = ['OK', 'WARN', 'ERROR']

    class DiagnosticPub(Node):
        def __init__(self):
            super().__init__('diagnostic_pub')
            self.last_status = None
            self.publisher = self.create_publisher(DiagnosticStatus, '/diagnostics', 10)
            self.timer = self.create_timer(1, self.callback)

        def callback(self):
            if self.last_status is None:
                # Random initial status
                status = random.randint(0, len(MODES))
            elif random.randint(0, 5) != 0:
                # Do not publish a msg every cycle
                return
            else:
                # Random new (different) status
                delta = random.randint(1, 2)
                status = (self.last_status + delta) % len(MODES)

            self.get_logger().info(f'Publishing {MODES[status]} status')
            self.publisher.publish(DiagnosticStatus(level=bytes(status)))
            self.last_status = status

    def main(args=None):
        rclpy.init(args=args)
        node = DiagnosticPub()
        rclpy.spin(node)

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        main()

> 

Reviewer: I still don't think we have a great answer here but we can deal with it later. 🤷🏻‍♀️
